feat: Provides 'Adding a Visual Studio Code Extension' module (#2265)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/end-user-guide/pages/adding-a-vscode-extension.adoc

:navtitle: Adding a Visual Studio Code extension to a workspace
:keywords: Visual Studio Code extension, user-guide

[id="adding-visual-studio-code-extension_{context}"]
= Adding a Visual Studio Code extension to a workspace

> Devfiles in the devfile v2 format don't contain any IDE-specific plug-ins or Visual Studio Code extensions. Instead, the plug-ins and extensions are described in a specific meta-folder.

Reviewer: When I read this phrase, the current wording raises some questions about devfiles:
- Are you specifying `v2` because other versions _can_ contain these plug-ins and extensions?
- As a user, what agency do I have in the things these phrases describe? 
- The first and second phrases juxtapose "contain" with "describe." Would it be clearer to use "describe" in both cases? 
- What is a "meta-folder?" I don't see that term anywhere else in the CHE docs content. Is there a more familiar or obvious term?

For example:
```suggestion
With devfiles that use the devfile v2 format, you don't describe IDE-specific plug-ins or Visual Studio Code extensions. Instead, you describe them in a specific folder.
```

Author: > Are you specifying v2 because other versions can contain these plug-ins and extensions?

yes

Reviewer: Consider making that difference more explicit:
```suggestion
Previously, with the devfiles v1 format, you used the devfile to specify IDE-specific plug-ins and Visual Studio Code extensions. Now, with devfiles v2, you use a specific meta-folder instead of the devfile to specify the plug-ins and extensions.
```

[id="plug-in-registries"]
== {prod-short} plug-in registries overview

> {prod-short} has a default plug-in and extensions registry installed in every {prod-short} instance. The Che-Theia IDE searches and installs the plug-ins and extensions from that location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every {prod-short} instance has a registry of default plug-ins and extensions. The Che-Theia IDE gets information about these plug-ins and extensions from the registry and installs them.
```
Are the plug-ins and extensions actually _in_ the registry, or does the registry point to their locations? This suggestion supposes the latter.

Author: point to the location in Che (but can be sometimes stored in the registry)

> Check this {prod-short} https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-plugin-registry[registry project] for an overview of default plug-ins, extensions, and source code. An online instance that is refreshed after every commit to the main branch, is located https://eclipse-che.github.io/che-plugin-registry/main/v3/plugins/[here]. You can use a different plug-in or extension registry for Che-Theia if you don't work in air gap mode: only the default registry is available there.

Reviewer: In some che-docs topics, `link:` precedes URLs like this, but not in this PR. Is that okay?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check this {prod-short} https://github.com/eclipse-che/che-plugin-registry[registry project] for an overview of [the?] default plug-ins, extensions, and source code. An online instance that refreshes after every commit to the main branch is located https://eclipse-che.github.io/che-plugin-registry/main/v3/plugins/[here]. You can use a different plug-in or extension registry for Che-Theia if you don't work in air gap mode: only the default registry is available there.
```

Reviewer: I'm having trouble making sense of the final sentence. 
- I don't see an "air gap mode" mentioned in the che-docs. Would it help to say "air-gapped environment", link to a topic, or specify the key parameters for setting up an air-gapped environment, such as `airGapContainerRegistryHostname`?
- @benoitf, does "only the default registry is available there" mean "only the default registry is available in an air-gapped environment?" This seems like the opposite of what I would expect. I expect the user would need to specify a custom (non-default) plug-in or extension registry _because_ they are in an air-gapped environment. The default URLs of the plug-ins and extensions might not be reachable from an air-gapped system.

Reviewer: Using the definite article, "the default plug-ins", makes more sense if the "registry project" topic describes specific plug-ins. Otherwise, if it's an abstract discussion of "plug-ins, extensions, and source code," the current wording is fine.

Author: 'air gap' is also named 'restricted environment' sometimes. But you can find definition there https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_gap_(networking)

And it's used in Che (and docs)

Reviewer: > 'air gap' is also named 'restricted environment' sometimes. But you can find definition there https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_gap_(networking)
> 
> And it's used in Che (and docs)

Although we should strive to use the terminology consistently, I'm not highlighting "air gap" as a problem. I'm concerned that calling it a "mode" might prompt users to search for an actual software *mode* when it seems like there might not be one. I'm guessing you mean "an air-gapped or restricted environment" instead.

Otherwise, if there is something like a mode, it's not called a "mode" in the software or documentation and actually consists of one or more parameters that the user must set when operating the software in a restricted environment.

Author: I'll accept any suggested changes but here suggested changes have questions so I never saw this kind of suggested changes.

>
Does "only the default registry is available there" mean "only the default registry is available in an air-gapped environment?" This seems like the inverse of what I would expect: That the user probably requires use of a custom plug-in or extension registry because they are in an air-gapped environment. The default URLs of the plug-ins and extensions might not be reachable from an air-gapped system.

There is no need to use a custom plug-in or extension registry. Che deploy a registry on the air-gapped environment and in that case it includes all the binaries so there is no need to fetch something externally. 

> The default URLs of the plug-ins and extensions might not be reachable from an air-gapped system.

everything is reachable in that case (we build and deploy an offline / air-gapped environment registry)

Reviewer 2: wording fixed

The plug-in and extension overview for Che-Code Visual Studio Code editor is located in the https://www.open-vsx.org/[OpenVSX instance]. Air gap mode is not yet supported for this editor.

[id="visual-studio-code-extensions-json"]
== Adding an extension to `.vscode/extensions.json`

The easiest way to add a Visual Studio Code extension to a workspace is to add it to the `.vscode/extensions.json` file. The main advantage of this method is that it works with all supported {prod-short} IDEs.

> If you use the Che-Theia IDE, the extension is installed and configured automatically. If you use a different supported IDE with the Che-Code Visual Studio Code fork, a pop-up with a recommendation to install the extension shows when you start the workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use the Che-Theia IDE, the extension is installed and configured automatically. If you use a different supported IDE with the Che-Code Visual Studio Code fork, the IDE [displays a pop-up with a recommendation/promts you] to install the extension when you start the workspace.
```

Author: GitHub suggestion implies that we can commit directly the change.
Here it looks that there are two suggestions so it should be two separate GitHub PR suggestions (and people can approve one of them)

Reviewer 2: wording fixed

.Prerequisites
. You have the `.vscode/extensions.json` file in the root of the GitHub repository.

.Procedure

> . Add the extension id to `.vscode/extensions.json` file. Use a `.` sign to separate the publisher and extension names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add the extension ID to the `.vscode/extensions.json` file. Use a `.` sign to separate the publisher and extension names:
```

+

> *EXAMPLE*

Reviewer: Didn't find any other instances of `*EXAMPLE*` in che-docs. Consider adopting the standard code block titles throughout, like this:
```
.Example <optional descriptive text>
```

Reviewer 2: formatting fixed

[source,json,subs="+quotes"]
----
  {
    "recommendations": [
      "redhat.java"
    ]
  }
----

> *NOTE* 

Reviewer: For comparison, I searched the che-docs repo for admonitions like one this but didn't find any. You can use the asciidoc formatting for admonitions, which looks like this:

```
NOTE: adlfjakdfj
```
or 
```
[NOTE]
====
afdasdf
====
```
The openshift-docs repo standardized on this later format... 
I would recommend asking your team which one to use.

Reviewer: This is how asciidoc renders the original format and the two proposed formats: 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/350907/162166352-5a4ca9b8-671f-4659-86fc-fcbaabf6269c.png)

Reviewer 2: formatting fixed

> If the specified set of extension ids isn't available in the {prod-short} registry, the workspace starts without the extension.

Reviewer: s/id/ID/ throughout.

Reviewer 2: fixed

[id="che-theia-plug-ins-YAML"]
== Adding plug-in parameters to `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml`

> You can add extra parameters to a plug-in by modifying the `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file. These modifications include:

Reviewer: Bulleted lists don't render as such unless they're preceded by a blank line.

Reviewer 2: formatting fixed

* Defining the plug-ins for workspace installation.

> * Changing default memory limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Changing the default memory limit.
```

* Overriding default preferences.

=== Defining the plug-ins for workspace installation
Define the plug-ins to be installed in the workspace.

.Prerequisites
. You have the `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file in the root of the GitHub repository.

.Procedure

> . Add the id of the plug-in in the  `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file. Use the `/` sign to separate the publisher and plug-in name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add the id of the plug-in to the  `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file. Use the `/` sign to separate the publisher and plug-in name:
```

+
*EXAMPLE*
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
- id: redhat/java  
----

> === Changing default memory limit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Changing the default memory limit
```

Override container settings such as the memory limit.

.Prerequisites
. You have the `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file in the root of the GitHub repository.

.Procedure

> . Add an `override` section in the `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file under the `id` of the plug-in.

Reviewer: add...to

Reviewer 2: wording fixed

. Specify the memory limit for the extension. In the following example, {prod-short} automatically installs the Red Hat Visual Studio Code Java extension in the {prod-short} workspace and increases the memory of the workspace by two gigabytes:
+
*EXAMPLE*
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----

  - id: redhat/java  
    override:  
      sidecar:  
        memoryLimit: 2Gi
----

=== Overriding default preferences

Override the default preferences of the Visual Studio Code extension for the workspace.

.Prerequisites
. You have the `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file in the root of the GitHub repository.

.Procedure

> . Add an `override` section in the `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file under the `id` of the extension. 

Reviewer: "add...to" here and elsewhere

Reviewer 2: wording fixed

. Specify the preferences in the `Preferences` section. In the following example, {prod-short} automatically installs Red Hat Visual Studio Code Java extension in the {prod-short} workspace and sets the `java.server.launchMode` preference to `LightWeight`.
+
*EXAMPLE*
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
  - id: redhat/java  
    override:  
      preferences:
        java.server.launchMode: LightWeight
----

> *NOTE* You can also define the preferences in the `.vscode/settings.json` file, either by changing the preferences in the UI of your IDE or by manually adding them to the `.vscode/settings.json` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*NOTE* You can also define the preferences in the `.vscode/settings.json` file, either by changing the preferences in the UI of your IDE or by adding them to the `.vscode/settings.json` file:
```

[source,json,subs="+quotes"]
----
{
"my.preferences": "my-value"
}
----

[id="visual-studio-code-extensions-in-devfile"]
== Defining Visual Studio Code extension attributes in the devfile

> In case it's not possible to add extra files in the GitHub repository, you can define some of the plug-in or extension attributes by inlining them in the devfile. You can use this procedure with both `.vscode/extensions.json` and `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file contents.

Reviewer: For minimalism:
- In case > If ?
- it's not possible to > you can't ?

Is there a more commonly understood equivalent for "inlining" that preserves the meaning?

Reviewer 2: wording fixed

=== Inlining `.vscode/extensions.json` file

> Use `.vscode/extensions.json` file contents to inline extension attributes in the devfile.

Reviewer: Part of the issue with using the adjective, "inline," as a verb is that when you use it next to a noun, as shown here, the reader might experience some semantic noise:
raising the question, "Is a verb missing between "to" and "inline extension attributes?" 
Perhaps subsitute it with "add" or "insert?" WDYT?

Reviewer 2: reworded as "inlining the extension/plug-in attributes"

=== Inlining `.vscode/extensions.json` file

.Procedure

. Edit the `devfile.yaml` file and add if it is missing the `attributes` section at the root of the devfile.

. Add `.vscode/extensions.json` and appends a | character after the colon separator

. Paste the content of the `.vscode/extensions.json` file

Example

[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
schemaVersion: 2.2.0  
metadata:  
  name: my-example  
attributes:  
  .vscode/extensions.json: |  
    {  
      "recommendations": [  
        "redhat.java"  
      ]  
    }
----

=== Inlining `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file

. Edit `devfile.yaml` file and add if missing the `attributes` section at the root of the devfile

. Add `.vscode/extensions.json` and appends a | character after the colon separator

. Paste the content of the `.che/che-theia-plugins.yaml` file

Example:

[source,yaml,subs="+quotes"]
----
schemaVersion: 2.2.0  
metadata:  
  name: my-example  
attributes:  
  .che/che-theia-plugins.yaml: |  
    - id: redhat/java
----

[id="plug-in-registries"]
== Plug-in registries

{prod-short} provides a default plug-in registry installed on every {prod-short} instance.

> When using `Che-Theia` as IDE, it will search and install the extensions from there.

Reviewer 3: my understanding that `che-theia` does not support the OpenVSX registry, right?

Author: correct
